an Israeli video apparently shows Hamas
Fighters surrendering and handing over
weapons in Gaza but critics are
dismissing it as staged and part of
Israeli propaganda so is the footage
real or fake and who gains or loses by
circulating it this is Inside
Story
[Music]
hello and welcome to the program I'm s
vaner propaganda as a tool of war is a
strategy that has been used for years
the war in Gaza is no different both
sides have been accused of spreading
disinformation a video is circulating in
Israeli media which purports to show the
surrender of some Hamas Fighters but
critics say it is staged and they've
cast doubt on its authenticity the
footage comes as Hamas continues to
resist Israel's Relentless assault more
than 9 weeks into the conflict and
Israel faces growing Global condemnation
for killing Palestinian civilians as the
death toll reaches 18,000 people killed
so is the video an attempt by Israel to
deflect accusations of genocide in Gaza
and is it real or fake we'll discuss all
this but first Finton Monahan's report
looking at the footage and the
circumstances leading to its
release
Palestinian men stripped and humiliated
by Israeli forces one man comes forward
and hands over a weapon the Israeli
government says these men are Hamas
Fighters and that images like this are
proof its war in Gaza is
[Music]
succeeding in recent days dozens of
Hamas terrorists have surrendered to our
forces they are laying down their
weapons and handing themselves over to
our heroic Fighters
but many analysts have cast doubt on the
video accusing Israeli forces of staging
some elements civilians have been
identified among the detainees as of un
staff Aid workers and at least one
journalist others point the coreographed
nature of the clip and even as a piece
of propaganda its Effectiveness has been
called into question whatever the
Israel's intended to do it has backfired
disastrously bad regardless of the
authenticity of it or not because the
images that have gone around the world
are images that show men and and and
young men and older men stripped down to
their underwear they're uh forced to
kneel on the ground they have their
hands tied behind them what does that
remind people of so reminds people of
Isis it reminds people of Abu it reminds
people of
brutality Israel is frequently accused
of spreading misinformation the Army
maintains these images show large
numbers of Fighters surrendering to
Israeli troops but Israeli media later
reported that only around 1 in 10 had
links to
Hamas this video shows an Israeli
military spokesman alleging a piece of
paper on a wall was a list of names of
Hamas members guarding Israeli captives
it turned out to be a list of the days
of the
week and in early December a military
spokesman said one Hamas fighter was
being killed for every two civilians in
Gaza a number many analysts find
difficult to believe
especially given the number of children
killed Israel is waging an information
War to win support for its military
campaign in Gaza but as that offensive
drags on it's facing increasing
criticism on the international stage and
growing impatience at home Benson molan
Al jazer for Inside
Story let's bring in our guests in
Washington DC is Sahar kamam a
non-resident senior fellow at the Middle
East Council on global Affairs and a
specialist on Arab and Muslim media
Sahar will come to you in just a moment
in Doha is Mark Owen Jones an associate
professor of Middle East studies at
hammad bin Khalifa University you
research how technology can be used as a
tool of Oppression and from London we
are joined by Dina matar a professor of
political communication and Arab media
at the center for Global media and
communication at soas that is the school
of Oriental and African studies thank
you very much to all of you for being
with us um Sahar let me start with you
I'd like your take on uh this video and
it was in Fenton's report this is the
video where we see dozens of Palestinian
men stripped to their underwear one of
them whom aljazera reporters in Gaza
have since identified as an aluminum
shop worker who is made to walk follow
Israeli instructions and and put down
weapons um in front of them I'd like
what did you think when you first saw
this video
well thank you for having me I think
that there is a famous saying that truth
is the biggest victim of War so whenever
you have War you also have some
accompanying degree of propaganda
misinformation and disinformation and
this has been very prevalent and very
clearly spread in the current situation
in Gaza and the horrific attack on Gaza
it is not the first time that we see
footage that cannot be documented cannot
be really verified as accurate and I
think that in this particular case
there's a lot of doubt about the
authenticity and verification of this
particular footage and this particular
video because indeed some of the people
who showed up in this particular video
were found to be civilians whether they
are just average citizens or even a
journalist or other people who have no
affiliation uh with Hamas and let me
just say that this is not the first time
that we have seen this type of
disinformation and even stag staged
videos emerge out of this particular
situation we all remember the case of
the staged video of the woman who posed
as a nurse from Al shifa hospital and
she started to say things like oh Hamas
is using you know the AL shifa hospital
as a place to actually have its own
military command center and it's
stealing food and fuel and resources and
energy uh from the uh Palestinian
civilians and doing horrific things and
then this whole video turned out to be
staged and fake and there was no proof
whatsoever that this woman was a nurse
or that she was at elifa hospital and
the whole thing was completely fake so
unfortunately we have been seeing that
time and time again in the midst of this
horrific attack on Gaza and
thisinformation and propaganda has been
used as a brutal we weapon in this
particular terrible situation Marco and
Jones referring back to that video again
the one where this Palestinian man
surrenders uh a weapon what is the
audience who's the audience for this for
for pictures like
these well I think the audience is
primarily the the Israeli public but I
would like to add that what was a
crucial aspect of that video that we
need to explain is that firstly one of
the iconic photographs was showing the
man holding the gun in his right hand
surrendering it and putting that gun on
a pile of other guns right and then what
later emerged on social media was a
video where you saw the same man walking
and holding his gun in the left hand
right which led to obviously obvious
accusations that this had been staging
that the man was repeatedly asked to
come and put guns down for the camera
and there's even a voice of a soldier
off off camera who's saying uh please
put the gun that we gave you down right
so I just wanted to emphasize that point
that people have talked about this video
being stage and there is a lot of
evidence to suggest that it was stage
and that they made a man who had already
been stripped to his underwear carry
weapons for the purposes of a photo
shoot so I think the purpose of that
video one is humiliation you know
there's no real reason why they should
be stripped to their underwear and
photographed let's not forget that it's
seen as a contravention of the Geneva
conven vention to public humiliate and
degrade prisoners of war and if you
photograph those prisoners you are
degrading them so to engage in that kind
of behavior and then publish it in a way
that goes viral I would say is designed
to humiliate not just Hamas but
Palestinians as as sahas said you know
there's there's plenty of evidence to
suggest that these Fighters are or the
people sorry in the pictures are
Ordinary People so I think what's
happening here as the pressure from the
US for the war to end is increases
Israel are more desperate to convey to
their domestic audience that there is
some sort of Victory here and the way
that they want to do that is to have
this Mass humiliation of Palestinian men
uh and then published that to an Israeli
audience to sort of demonstrate that
there has been sufficient Vengeance for
what happened on October the 7th Dina
matar your thoughts on this because you
one could easily argue that this has
backfired this as other videos have that
Israel has released since the beginning
of this conflict there is so much talk
on social media um in Broad news on this
video and in a similar way there was
very a lot of talk on previous videos
that Israel has released and there was
just really deep questions fundamental
questions on the on the authenticity of
the videos whether they were staged to
what extent they were staged
Etc could one consider that this has
backfired and continues to backfire for
Israel um well that's a good question I
think I was today looking at the BBC
coverage of this uh particular video and
even the BBC which has now gone into the
practice of verifying and putting the
word verify uh of U various videos that
come out of of the war um it was
interesting to see that even in the BBC
report it said there are still questions
remaining in terms of the authenticity
there's another point you know so the
first images of uh the group of men or
you know it's not only a group it's a
couple of hundred men stripped down to
that under where that that first image
came out um you know maybe about four
days ago or even more and then the video
of uh the man with a with with a gun
came back uh later so there is the
timing element so the question arises as
as to why um did Israel decide or
Israeli authorities or the IDF decide to
um to publish uh the image of the man
with the gun there's another issue that
I want to raise here which is despite
the very um you know the sophistication
of Israeli intelligence and Israeli uh
communication practices and their
propaganda machine these videos show a
bit of kind of naivity and in a sense
they are probably images taken by by the
soldiers themselves of of their captives
uh and then
reframed uh by I um that's my assumption
I mean I I don't know whether I'm
correct or not uh time will tell is that
they have been reframed as part of the
Israeli propaganda campaign and the uh
misinformation campaigns that have um
that have kind of come up quite a lot
during this this war against Gaza
there's something I'd like to put to all
of you is that these videos that we've
been by the way putting up on screen of
course as you've been talking um these
videos have been referenced by Israeli
leadership we heard Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu referenced
it earlier in that report that Hamas
Fighters were laying down their weapons
this is heri the Israeli chief of
general staff listen to
him I see the achievements from day to
day we are seeing every day terrorists
are killed and also terrorists who are
injured in the last few days we also
have seen them surrendering a sign of
the collapse of the system a sign that
we need to press harder and this is what
you are
doing all right um Sahar so we see
there's this kind of of feed feedback
loop almost where the video makes it
onto Israeli media this video the sound
bite that we just aired was recorded a
couple days ago uh and then you see the
heads of the military or the Prime
Minister saying ah we have a video this
shows that our military campaign is
working and it seems that one feeds into
the
other I think that Israel is desperate
in order to paint an IM of some kind of
quote unquote Victory because that has
not really been the case I mean it was
hoping for some kind of grand operation
that would really put Hamas down to its
knees in a very short time and as we all
know that did not happen the ground
operation in Gaza did not go as planned
for Israel or as as hoped for and as it
loses more and more of its own soldiers
and artillery and all of that stuff it
is really desperate in order to show
that it is doing some kind of success or
some kind of Victories being being
achieved in Gaza hence these kinds of
videos that are mostly staged and
unverified as we've been giving examples
before we all know the example of course
also in a chfa hospital where the
soldiers claimed that Hamas had a
command control center under the
hospital and then of course there were
all of these jokes in uh you know Arab
uh social media posts about the calendar
that was shown on the wall and that some
Israeli soldier was pointing down to as
like oh this is like a list of Hamas
Fighters when in fact it was just a list
of the days of the week so there were
like jokes going on viral on social
media saying you know be careful if
you're an Arab don't keep a calendar
because that can really prove that you
are somehow associated with Hamas or
humus so it has been like you know
really uh used in in the uh social media
context as some kind of making fun of
this type of dangerous disinformation
but it is not only funny it is really
very dangerous because some people
unfortunately take these types of
disinformation and it is disinformation
not misinformation because
misinformation happens when you don't
get the facts right but you have a good
intention but this information happens
as in these cases when you deliberately
tweak the facts and actually create some
kind of fake uh scenario or fake story
that never happened so this is called
disinformation and that is very
dangerous because unfortunately some
receivers or audiences may not be witty
enough may not be really media literate
and can just take all of that stuff at
face value and believe it to be a fact
when it's not but you know even within
the Israeli media if you read haret for
instance They Carried this report with
uh and they attributed they they quoted
senior security officials told haret on
Sunday that of the hundreds of
Palestinian detainees photographed
handcuffed in the Gaza Strip about 10 to
15% are Hamas operatives or are
identified within the organization now
simple math tells us that means
85 to 90% of the people that we see in
these pictures are not in any way
affiliated with Hamas and the military
the Israeli military say that they've
released they've released the others so
it it seems that there's there's the
there's the big picture narrative that's
being put out as we said that by
Netanyahu the heads of the military and
then when they're questioned in detail
by the media they say well actually 90%
of these people are not Hamas operative
so mark this goes back to the question
that I was asking you earlier who is
the who's the intended audience and
what's the purpose if you're then going
to say actually most of these people
were
civilians well again I think you know
this isn't just about Hamas I think what
we're seeing here and and I mentioned it
earlier and this notion of you know the
fact that the men in the photos were
stripped down down to the underwear this
is about humiliation right and it's not
just about the act of humiliation it's
it's it's it's the public broadcasting
of these images which makes that
humiliation a form of viral humiliation
right it's about you know helping
dehumanize Palestinians and othering
them and I think this is another
argument of why it's for the not just
the Israeli audience but the global
audience to an extent one of the issues
we've seen coming out of uh the past two
months is this attempt to routinely
dehumanize Palestinians why is it
important to dehumanize them well
because if you dehumanize them and we've
seen lots of discourse like this from
for example Israeli official the
Palestinians as human animals if people
are encouraged to see Palestinians as
less than human they'll be more likely
to support continued uh not just Israeli
action against Palestinians but
increasingly horrible treatment of
Israelis of Palestinians right because
and this Narrative of dehumanization is
contributing to this so I think this
photo of Palestinians uh was an attempt
at dehumanization to further basically
legitimize continued Israeli attacks on
them and I use this kind of example of
the audience right some people say well
why this this disinformation often seems
so flimsy or the staged elements seem
obvious well it's like Israel air
strikes so Israel are happy to kill a
100 civilians if it means they're
killing one Hamas leader they're happy
to arrest 100 civilians if it means
arresting 10 Hamas leaders but I say the
same for disinformation it doesn't
matter if a 100 people you know critical
people realize that the disinformation
is nonsense as long as two or three
Israelis will believe that
disinformation then it's been successful
to an
extent Dena there is in Hebrew and it
doesn't have an English exact English
translation the concept of
hasbara uh which is
um which is
essentially a Communications strategy to
explain what the state of Israel is
doing the closest approximation to the
word to the Hebrew word hasbara is
explain right explain what Israel is
doing do you want to explain to our
viewers how how Israel uses that and has
used that in the
past so Israel has used hasp which is um
translated into public relations or
communication strategies uh in very
specific and um targeted ways I agree
with Mark that the um audience for uh
this particular clip we we were talking
about is the Israeli audience and in a
sense it's a way of telling them look
you know we are taking hostages and in a
sense it's saying we but also you know
kind of um keeping them and humiliating
them um so maybe uh it's a way of
responding to the uh current debate uh
within Israeli societies particularly by
the um family members of hostages uh in
in Gaza but to go back to hasbara it's a
it's a a strategy political
communication strategy that Israel has
been using to try and uh legitimize its
own uh narrative about about itself um
in a way you know the right to exist the
right to defend itself um you know kind
of locating it within this uh
anti-semitic frame U you know everyone
who who uh criticizes Israel is is
immediately branded as being
anti-semitic and this hasb is um
targeted at different different people
and publics it's not only it it's
basically targeted at public in um in
the West perhaps in the Arab world as
well to try and uh you know kind of um
change their perspectives or perhaps uh
show that you know or or U support
Israel in its claims to about itself and
we have seen many examples uh about that
over the years and um uh it is a very
pernicious um strategy um and you could
see that um some of the one of the most
important figures who practices uh it is
of course Mark reg who um who probably
has had uh training in communication and
how to use language um and he insists on
uh using particular terms all the time
um denying any possibility of thinking
otherwise so this is what hasbara is and
it's been written about quite a lot um
in in the literature in the academic
literature in terms of the literature on
propaganda and on strategic
communication by the way Mark Reger is
an Israeli Diplomat a civil servant a
government adviser but most TV viewers
especially people who watch news about
the Israeli Palestinian conflict they
will definitely have seen him in
interviews because he speaks obviously
in favor of Israel but he speaks he
gives a lot of interviews to explain uh
the Israeli uh the Israeli point of view
outside of Israel do you feel that for
this conflict hasbara is working because
Israel since since October the 7th has
lost a lot of international support we
know how the world feels about this war
because there was a resolution at the UN
General Assembly I'm not not talking
about the one at the security Council
I'm talking about the general assembly
which takes the temperature of how all
the countries in the world feels there
was an overwhelming majority for a
ceasefire and to stop the fighting do
you feel hasbara is working outside of
uh Israel for this conflict for this
war are you asking me I can I can answer
um I think I I think um it has worked in
past uh but I think people are beginning
to see the uh you know are beginning to
see that uh there are the claims made by
Israel are just claims you know they're
just uh lies
misinformation you know propaganda
that's all we could say um and there is
a shift in opinion particularly amongst
the younger generation and that's
because they are using social media
they're able to see what's happen
they're mobilizing behind other terms
and so on but uh hasar is is still used
and and you know it is supported by a
lot of funding uh in the UK we have
something called bom which is a British
Israeli communication um unit that was
established about um I would say
2016 with a purpose of um with the
purpose of uh flooding uh the public
space and the media space in the UK with
with the pro-israeli narrative um so we
see a shift amongst the young people but
I think the older generation are are
much harder to shift in terms of their
opinion Sahar does this kind of video
and others that came before it including
ones that you talked about others that
we referenced that were either debunked
or that were you know laughed at on
social media and seen as either widely
inaccurate or completely staged does
that pose a problem for the US which is
the main supporter of Israel in this war
at this stage I mean let's just remind
our viewers you know based on the the
the US veto at the UN Security Council
just a few days ago Israel is just one
US veto away now uh from not being able
to prosecute this war as it's currently
doing right so that they need the US to
be on board does this create a a PR
problem for the
US I think it does because the
unconditional and one-sided support that
us has been given Israel since the
beginning of all of the events unfolding
since October 7th has been really uh
something that a lot of people have
critiqued and blamed the US for really
being this staunch supporter of Israel
when we have more than 18,000 lives lost
uh in Gaza most of whom are women and
children and elderly people who are just
plain civilians that have nothing to do
uh with Hamas so this really creates an
image crisis for the United States and
shakes its own reputation credibility
and International Leadership on the
international stage I also want to
highlight the very important point which
is the double-edge sword of social media
social media played a very very
important role in the midst of these
events I mean on one hand it really
allowed the truth to come out in a way
that was not possible through the
mainstream American Media or Western
media in general most of whom have
adopted a narrative that's really really
very supportive of Israel all the way
and did not give a lot of room for
showing the other side of the story
which is the suffering of the
Palestinian people day in and day out
therefore the world Consciousness was
shocked when they started to see all of
these images and videos coming out of
Gaza and they're like oh my God wait a
minute we are not seeing that on you
know traditional mainstream average
Western Media or American Media but we
are seeing it now through social media
social media played a very important
role to create this kind of Awakening of
international public opinion and we saw
how that was reflected in massive
demonstrations and protests and marches
all over the world one of them here in
Washington DC exceeded half a million
people which is unprecedented on the
other hand however social media had
another side which is a negative one
where it really became a platform for
the spread of staged videos and in some
cases misinformation or disinformation
or propaganda just like some of the
footage and videos we have been talking
about so we have to bear in mind also
this double-edged sword effect of social
media and how it can have positive as
well as negative consequences at the
same time Mark if we flip the coin what
has been hamas's communication strategy
how have they countered the the the
whether it's the videos or the messaging
that we're seeing out of
Israel well I think they've shifted over
time I think the initial attacks on
October the 7th you saw a sort of
celebration of brutality uh which
obviously was in the terms of generating
Global sympathy was entirely in effect
persective but I think the thing is
Hamas apart from putting out these
occasional videos where you see
spokesmen talking about what they've
done and how many Israeli how much
Israeli equipment they've destroyed have
attempted to kind of try and portray
themselves in a more legitimate light so
we've seen Hamas spokesman conferences
now with those advertising backboards uh
when we've had the hostage hostage
exchanges we've also seen you know a lot
of narratives promoting this idea that
Hamas have been humanely treating their
hostages whereas Israeli palestin
prisoners of Israel have been really
treated badly so they' made a kind of
lot of this and now we're seeing more
videos of of Hamas you know showing and
documenting their attacks on Israeli
tanks uh again to show you know Hamas
are strong and won't be cowed uh but I
think generally over time the need Hamas
have to to kind of counter Israel's
points are not strictly that important I
mean as sah said and as deas mentioned
you know there's a lot of social media
content coming out from journalists
still in Gaza that show the absolute
devastation that Israel's bombing has
caused I mean when you have over 16,000
people killed uh a huge number of which
are children uh then Global sympathy is
obviously going to be on your side so
Hamas actually don't need to do much
because when those videos are being put
out that is going to be the most
effective form of persuasion that Hamas
need and so I think that's really
important to remember when we talk about
the propaganda War here there's a
certain asymmetry and Hamas have
benefited from the fact that Israel's
brutal response has just generated so
much anti-israeli propaganda
itself and that's all the time we have
for today but I'd like to thank all our
guests for joining us Sahar kamam Mar
oen Jones and Dina marar thank you very
much to all of you and thank you too for
watching you can see the program again
anytime by visiting our website that's
alo.com and for further discussion go to
our Facebook page that's
facebook.com AJ insidestory you can also
join the conversation on X our handle at
AJ insid story from me sarl vaner the
whole team here in Doha bye for
[Music]
now